No index 001 (#478)
NINAnor/ecRxiv: R/NO_IDEX_001.qmd

country: Norway
continent: Europe
ECT: NA
Realm:
  - Terrestrial (T)
Biome:
  - NA
Ecosystem:
  - NA
yearAdded: 2026
yearLastUpdate: 2026
status: incomplete
Version: "1.0.0"
VersionComment: Phase 1 equal-weight composite index from published indicator MC distributions
url: https://github.com/NINAnor/ecRxiv
Normalised: NA
SpatialAggregationPathway: Resample - Aggregate (equal-weight mean) - Summarise
format:
  html:
    embed-resources: true
    code-fold: true
    toc: true
    toc-title: Contents
    toc-depth: 3
    smooth-scroll: true
execute:
  cache: true
author:
  - name: Aud Helen Halbritter
    affiliations:
      - name: University of Bergen
AuthorList: Halbritter, A. H.
date: July 1, 2026
data_availability: gold
code_reproducibility: gold
open_science_badge: gold
callout-icon: false
lightbox: true
css: ../../../style.css
code-links:
  - text: Add a review
    icon: github
    href: https://github.com/NINAnor/ecRxiv
hide: FALSE
bibliography: references.bib
---

```{r setup}
#| include: false
#| cache: false
if (file.exists("renv/activate.R")) {
  source("renv/activate.R")
} else if (file.exists("../renv/activate.R")) {
  source("../renv/activate.R")

> }

Reviewer: I've been hashing out these when I update something on main. When I need to restore an renv in a subfolder, I like to run `renv::load("path_to_folder")` and then `renv::restore()`. This gives me better control, but then this code messes things up again. I will do the same here.

library(knitr)
library(tidyverse)
library(kableExtra)
library(here)
library(anybadger)
library(conflicted)

conflicts_prefer(dplyr::filter)
conflicts_prefer(dplyr::lag)
conflicts_prefer(dplyr::select)

if (!requireNamespace("ecTools", quietly = TRUE)) {
  remotes::install_github("NINAnor/ecTools", upgrade = "never")
}
if (!requireNamespace("arrow", quietly = TRUE)) {
  install.packages("arrow")
}
if (!requireNamespace("MetBrewer", quietly = TRUE)) {
  install.packages("MetBrewer")
}

> library(ecTools)

Reviewer: ecTools is not in the lockfile. Maybe you need to make another snapshot? Also I noticed the column name sampled_mean some places, telling me you might be using a slightly alder version of ecTools. It's been renamed sample_value after I added the option to aggregate with sums in addition to means.

Author: Thanks, this has been updated now.

<!--# Update this log with short messages for each update -->
- 1 July 2026 - First draft of calculation
- 14 August 2026 - Renamed to NO_IDEX_001, update indicator list, imputation of missing reporting years, direct national aggregation, and update figures
:::

<hr />

## 1. Aim

NO_IDEX_001 combines published ecRxiv indicator uncertainty distributions into composite indices. Version 1.0.0 contains indices for **forest** and **mountain** ecosystems, for year 2024, separately by region, for Norway, and for ECT classes.
Values near 1 indicate better ecological condition relative to reference; values toward 0 indicate deterioration.

## 2. Datasets {#sec-datasets}

First, we check which indicators are included in each index and where their results can be found on ecRxiv.

**Indicator lists** Forest indicators are listed in `data/indicators_2026.csv`; mountain indicators follow [ECA_2026 #104](https://github.com/NINAnor/ECA_2026/issues/104) in `data/indicators_mountain.csv`.
Each row specifies the indicator name, ecRxiv ID, and ECT class assignment.

```{r refresh-sources}
#| cache: false
# Refresh manifest from local git (upstream main + submission-* branches)
invisible(tryCatch(

>   scan_git_indicator_sources(git_remote = "upstream"),

Reviewer: I'm still not sure what this does. For me it doesnt run, but stops with this error (if I bypass the traCatch): 

```
> scan_git_indicator_sources(git_remote = "upstream")
Error in `dplyr::arrange()` at [ecRxiv/R/index_functions.R:753:3](vscode-file://vscode-app/c:/Users/anders.kolstad/AppData/Local/Programs/Positron/resources/app/out/vs/code/electron-browser/workbench/workbench.html#):
ℹ In argument: `..1 = .data$indicator_id`.
Caused by error in `.data$indicator_id`:
! Column `indicator_id` not found in `.data`.
```

Author: This code scans the upstream repo (main and submission branches) for indicators. I used it when developing the code and there were many branches that were not merged yet. The code could be useful, when new indicators come in and we want to calculate the index, but it is not strictly needed anymore. I fixed the problem, so it should run now. But we can also remove it to simplify the code.

Reviewer: Consider moving it to functions.R, but not a big deal. A very nice function to have.

**The national index goes through the same two steps above, same as the regions.**
All indicators publish their own national ("Norway") draws alongside the five regions, so each indicator's value going into step 1 for the Norway area is simply its own published national draw, not a recomputation by us from the five regions.
This matters because a published national value can reflect region weighting that is specific to that indicator - for example, the glacier area indicator ([NO_GLAC_001](https://github.com/NINAnor/ecRxiv/tree/main/indicators/NO_GLAC_001)) down-weights southern Norway in its own national value, because glaciers make up a much smaller share of that region (see [ECA_2026 #76](https://github.com/NINAnor/ECA_2026/issues/76#issuecomment-4864265018)).
As a fallback, indicators without a published national value get a synthetic one via equal-weight upscaling across the five regions (`fill_missing_national_draws()`).

This propagates uncertainty from individual indicators through ECT classes to the composite index without assuming independence beyond the structure encoded in the published indicator MC distributions.

> No weighting is done between indicators, ECT classes, or regions: all indicators, ECT classes, and regions have equal weight (`weight = 1`), with one exception: `NO_GLAC_001`'s own published national value already down-weights southern Norway (see above), and we use that published value as-is rather than overriding it with an equal-weight regional average.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No weighting is done between indicators og ECT classes: all indicators and ECT classes have equal weight (`weight = 1`). Individual indicators define their own regional weights to obtain their national estimate. Usually this weight is defined by the ecosystem extant for each region. There is one notable exception: `NO_GLAC_001`'s own published national value used the glacier area in the reference period as the regional weight, with the result of down-weighting southern Norway in the national estimate. . We use these national draws as-is rather than overriding it with an equal-weight regional average.
```

### 3.3.1 Direct national aggregation (no ECT step)

We also calculate a direct national index that skips the ECT step: every matched indicator is resampled directly to the index with equal weight (`aggregate_indicators_to_index_direct()`), rather than first being equal-weighted within its ECT class.
This means an ECT class with many indicators has proportionally more influence on this version of the index than it does in the ECT-based workflow, where each ECT class counts equally regardless of how many indicators it contains.

This direct aggregation is computed independently, and reported alongside the ECT-based index (tagged `"Index (direct)"` in the results) so the two can be compared.

### 3.4 Summaries

The full MC distributions (all areas) are stored for export.
For reporting we summarise each ECT class and the overall index by the **median** and an approximate **95% interval** (2.5% and 97.5% quantiles).
Regional and national (Norway) indices are both calculated by the same steps 1–2 above, since Norway is treated as just another area (see @sec-analyses).

```{r run-forest}
#| cache: true

> #| cache.extra: !expr digest::digest(registry_forest)

Reviewer: this is neat

forest_index <- calculate_index(
  registry_forest |> filter(match_status == "matched"),
  n_sim = n_sim,
  n_years = n_years,
  report_years = report_years,
  max_gap = max_gap,
  include_direct_index = TRUE

> )

Reviewer: This takes a while to run, and I was thinking maybe we should not resample each time we make small updates, like during typesetting or when ew just want to update the text or the metadata. So I added a saveRDS() step here, and I also added data to the file name. It's a bit old fashioned maybe, but the files isn't that big and it makes it safer and easy to check that we are using the right data file. If you like it, then please add eth same to the mountain code block below and commit the cached files.

Author: ok, that makes sense
